# Rare Cell Types Identification from Single-cell RNA Sequencing Data

This is my thesis project in which I worked on a novel methodology to determine rare cell types from single-cell RNA sequencing data  under the supervision of my professor Dr. Monalisa Mandal. Rare cells are the cell types that occur in very small numbers within tissues while other cell types surrounding them are highly abundant. Some examples of rare cell types include circulating tumour cells, cancer stem cells, endothelial progenitor cells, antigen-specific T cells, invariant natural killer T cells etc. Rare cells play an important role in the diagnosis and prognosis of many cancers, prenatal diagnosis, diagnosis of viral infections, mediating immune responses etc. Our proposed method for the detection of rare cells from single cell gene expression profile data is based on Optimized Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN). In this experiment, two different single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets from Gene Expression Omnibus and a synthetic dataset were used to evaluate the performance of the algorithm. At first, the data is preproecssed through handling missing values, normalisation and dimensionality reduction. Then clustering is performed to group the data points and segregate the outliers (rare cells) with random DBSCAN parameters initially and silhouette score is used for cluster evaluation. This is followed by parameter tuning using an optimizing technique to achieve optimal results. For unlabeled data, an ANN model is also created, trained with clustering labels and tested for analysis of the generated training data set and cluster validation.

